---
header-includes: |
  \usepackage{libertine}
  \renewcommand{\ttdefault}{cmtt}
...

---
title: Using `SDL_bgi`
author: Guido Gonzato, PhD
date: \today
...

<!---

  Convert this file with:

  pandoc -V urlcolor=blue -V toccolor=red --toc using.md -o using.pdf

--->

# Introduction to `SDL_bgi`

`SDL_bgi` is a graphics library (`GRAPHICS.H`) for C, C++, WebAssembly,
and Python. It's based on SDL2 and it's portable on many platforms.

If you're familiar with BGI, the Borland Graphics Interface provided
by Turbo C or Borland C++, then using `SDL_bgi` along with `gcc` or
`clang` will be straighforward. If you don't even know what BGI was,
don't worry: you will find `SDL_bgi` an easy and fun way to do
graphics programming.

This document shows how to get started with `SDL_bgi`; please consult
`sdl_bgi-quickref.pdf` for a complete function reference.


## Compiling Programs

The following sections only apply to C and WebAssembly; Python, of
course, is not compiled.

### Native Code

To compile a C or C++ program on GNU/Linux, macOS or Raspios you can
use the `gcc`,`clang`, or `tcc` compilers. With `gcc` or `clang`:

    $ gcc -o program program.c -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2

With `tcc`:

    $ tcc -o program program.c -w -D SDL_DISABLE_IMMINTRIN_H \
        -I /usr/include/SDL2 -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2

You may get compilation errors affecting `libpulsecommon`; they can be
safely ignored.

`tcc` can also be invoked from scripts. You just need to add the
following line (it can't be split with `\`) at the start of your C
source (GNU/Linux):

    #!/usr/bin/tcc -run -w -D SDL_DISABLE_IMMINTRIN_H -I /usr/include/SDL2 -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2

but for better compatibility, please have a look at the `demo/tccrun`
script.

To compile a program in [MSYS2](https://www.msys2.org/) + MINGW64:

    $ gcc -o program.exe program.c -lmingw32 -L/mingw64/bin \
        -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2main -lSDL2 # -mwindows

The `-mwindows` switch creates a window-only program, i.e. a terminal
is not started. *Beware:* functions provided by `stdio.h` will not
work if you don't start a terminal; your program will have to rely on
mouse input only.

[Code::Blocks](https://www.codeblocks.org/) users should read the file
`howto_CodeBlocks.md`.

[Dev-C++](https://sourceforge.net/projects/orwelldevcpp) users should read
the file `howto_Dev-Cpp.md`.

### WebAssembly

To compile a program to WebAsssembly using `emcc`, provided by
[Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/docs/compiling/WebAssembly.html):

    $ emcc -o program.html program.c \
        -std=gnu99 -O2 -Wall -lSDL_bgi -lm \
        -s USE_SDL=2             `# uses SDL2 module` \
        -s ALLOW_MEMORY_GROWTH=1 `# needed for the argb palette` \
        -s ASYNCIFY              `# implement loops` \
        -s SINGLE_FILE           `# standalone html files`

where `SDL_bgi.bc` is the precompiled `SDL_bgi` wasm module.
The resulting `program.html` can be loaded and run in web browsers,
without the need of starting a local web server:

    $ firefox program.html

### Compilation Details

Windows users *must* declare the `main()` function as:

    int main (int argc, char *argv[])

even if `argc` and `argv` are not going to be used. Your program will
not compile if you use a different `main()` definition (i.e. `int main
(void)`), because of conflict with the `WinMain()` definition. It's an
SDL2 feature; please consult <https://wiki.libsdl.org/FAQWindows> for
details.


## Python Usage

The `sdl_bgi.py` module implements nearly all functions. In general,
Python functions have the same name and arguments as their C
counterparts. For more details, please see `howto_Python.md`. 


# Using `SDL_bgi`

Although `SDL_bgi` is almost perfectly compatible with the original
`GRAPHICS.H` by Borland, a few minor differences have been introduced.
The original BGI library mainly targeted the VGA video display
controller, which was quite limited and provided at most 16
colours. `SDL_bgi` uses modern graphics capabilities provided by
`SDL2`, while retaining backwards compatibility as much as possible.

Most old programs that use the original BGI library should compile
unmodified. For instance,

    int gd = DETECT, gm;
    initgraph (&gd, &gm, "");

creates an 800x600 window, mimicking SVGA graphics. If the environment
variable `SDL_BGI_RES` is set to  `VGA`, window resolution will be
640x480.

Minimal `dos.h` and `conio.h` are provided in the `demo/` directory;
they're good enough to compile the original `bgidemo.c`.

Please note that non-BGI functions are *not* implemented. If you need
`conio.h` for GNU/Linux, please have a look at one of these:

- <https://github.com/nowres/conio-for-linux>
- <https://gitlab.com/marcodiego/conio>

To specify the window size, you can use the new SDL driver:

    gd = SDL;
    gm = <mode>;

where `<mode>` can be one of the following:

    CGA             320x200
    SDL_320x200     320x200
    EGA             640x350
    SDL_640x480     640x350
    VGA             640x480
    SDL_640x480     640x480
    SVGA            800x600
    SDL_800x600     800x600
    SDL_1024x768    1024x768
    SDL_1152x900    1152x900
    SDL_1280x1024   1280x1024
    SDL_1366x768    1366x768
    SDL_FULLSCREEN  fullscreen

More less common resolutions are listed in `SDL_bgi.h`. You may want
to use `initwindow(int width, int height)` instead.

`SDL_bgi.h` defines the `_SDL_BGI_H` constant. You can check for its
presence and write programs that employ `SDL_bgi` extensions; please
have a look at the test program `fern.c`.


## Screen Refresh

The only real difference between the original BGI and `SDL_bgi` is the
way the screen is refreshed. In BGI, every graphics element drawn on
screen was immediately displayed. This was a terribly inefficient way
of drawing stuff: the screen should be refreshed only when the drawing
is done. For example, in SDL2 this action is performed by
`SDL_RenderPresent()`.

You can choose whether to open the graphics system using
`initgraph()`, which toggles BGI compatibility on and forces a screen
refresh after every graphics command, or using `initwindow()` that
leaves you in charge of refreshing the screen when needed, using the
new function `refresh()`.

The first method is fully compatible with the original BGI, but it
also painfully slow. An experimental feature is 'auto mode': if the
environment variable `SDL_BGI_RATE` is set to `auto`, screen refresh
is automatically performed; this is *much* faster than the default.
This variable may also contain a refresh rate; e.g. 60. Unfortunately,
auto mode may not work on some NVIDIA graphic cards.

As a tradeoff between performance and speed, a screen refresh is also
performed by `getch()`, `kbhit()`, and `delay()`. Functions
`sdlbgifast(void)`, `sdlbgislow(void)`, and `sdlbgiauto(void)` are
also available. They trigger fast, slow, and auto mode, respectively.

Documentation and sample BGI programs are available at this address:

<https://winbgim.codecutter.org/V6_0/doc/>

Nearly all programs can be compiled with `SDL_bgi`.

The original Borland Turbo C 2.0 manual is also available here:

<https://archive.org/details/bitsavers_borlandturReferenceGuide1988_19310204>.


## Avoid Slow Programs

This is possibly the slowest `SDL_bgi` code one could write:

    while (! event ()) {
      putpixel (random(x), random(y), random(col));
      refresh ();
    }

This code, which plots pixels until an event occurs (mouse click or
key press), is extremely inefficient. First of all, calling `event()`
is relatively expensive; secondly, refreshing the screen after
plotting a single pixel is insane. You should write code like this:

    counter = 0;
    stop = 0;
    while (! stop) {
      putpixel (random(x), random(y), random(col));
      if (1000 == ++counter) {
        if (event())
          stop = 1;
        refresh ();
        counter = 0;
      }
    }

In general, you should use `kbhit()`, `mouseclick()` and `event()`
sparingly, because they're slow.


## Differences

Please see the accompanying document `compatibility`.


## Colours

`SDL_bgi` has two colour palettes: one for compatibility with old BGI,
the other for ARGB colours. Colour depth is always 32 bit; `SDL_bgi`
has not been tested on lesser colour depths.

The default BGI palette includes 16 named colours (`BLACK`...`WHITE`);
standard BGI functions, like `setcolor()` or `setbkcolor()`, use this
palette. By default, colours in the default palette don't have the
same RGB values as the original BGI colours; the palette is brighter
and (hopefully) better looking. The original RGB values will be used
if the environment variable `SDL_BGI_PALETTE` is set to `BGI`.

An extended ARGB palette can be used by functions like `setrgbcolor()`
or `setbkrgbcolor()` described below; please note the `rgb` in the
function names. The size of the palette is given by
`getrgbpalettesize()`; default value is 4096, but it can be increased
using `resizepalette()`.

Please see the example programs in the `demo/` directory.


## Fonts

Fonts that are almost pixel-perfect compatible with the original
Borland Turbo C++ 3.0 `CHR` fonts are built in. Characters in the
ASCII range 32 - 254 are available. Loading `CHR` fonts from disk is
also possible.

`CHR` fonts support was added by Marco Diego Aur√©lio Mesquita.


## Additions

Some functions and macros have been added to add functionality and
provide compatibility with other BGI implementations (namely, Xbgi and
WinBGIm).

Further, the following variables (declared in `SDL_bgi.h`) are
accessible to the programmer:

    SDL_Window   *bgi_window;
    SDL_Renderer *bgi_renderer;
    SDL_Texture  *bgi_texture;

and can be used by native SDL2 functions; see example in
`demo/sdlbgidemo.c`.


### Screen and Windows Functions

- `void initwindow(int width, int height)` lets you open a window
specifying its size. If either `width` or `height` is 0, then
`SDL_FULLSCREEN` will be used.

- `void detectgraph(int *gd, int *gm)` returns `SDL`,
`SDL_FULLSCREEN`.

- `void setwinoptions(char *title, int x, int y, Uint32 flags)` lets
you specify the window title (default is `SDL_bgi`), window position,
and some SDL2 window flags OR'ed together. In particular, you can get
non-native fullscreen resolution with:

```
setwinoptions ("", -1, -1, SDL_WINDOW_FULLSCREEN);
initwindow (800, 600);
```

- `getscreensize(int *x, int *y)` reports the screen width and height
in `x` and `y`. You can also use related functions `getmaxheight()`
and `getmaxwidth()`.

- `void sdlbgifast(void)` triggers "fast mode" even if the graphics
system was opened with `initgraph()`. Calling `refresh()` is needed to
display graphics.

- `void sdlbgislow(void)` triggers "slow mode" even if the graphics
system was opened with `initwindow()`. Calling `refresh()` is not
needed.

- `void sdlbgiauto(void)` triggers automatic screen refresh. **Note**:
it may not work on some graphics cards.


### Multiple Windows Functions

Subsequent calls to `initgraph()` or `initwindow()` make it possible
to open several windows; only one of them is active (i.e. being drawn
on) at any given moment, regardless of mouse focus.

Functions `setvisualpage()` and `setactivepage()` only work properly
in single window mode.

- `int getcurrentwindow()` returns the active window identifier.

- `void setcurrentwindow(int id)` sets the current active window. `id`
is an integer identifier, as returned by `getcurrentwindow()`.

- `void closewindow(int id)` closes a window of given id.


### Colour Functions

- `void setrgbpalette(int color, int r, int g, int b)` sets colours in
an additional palette containing ARGB colours (up to `PALETTE_SIZE`).
See example in `demo/mandelbrot.c`.

- `void setrgbcolor(int col)` and `void setbkrgbcolor(int col)` are
the ARGB equivalent of `setcolor(int col)` and `setbkcolor(int col)`.
`col` is an allocated colour entry in the ARGB palette.

- `COLOR(int r, int g, int b)` can be used as an argument whenever a
colour value is expected (e.g. `setcolor()` and other functions). It's
an alternative to `setrgbcolor(int col)` and `setbkrgbcolor(int col)`.
Allocating colours with `setrgbpalette()` and using `setrgbcolor()` is
much faster, though.

- `COLOR32(Uint32 color)` works like `COLOR()`, but accepts a colour
argument as an ARGB Uint32.

- `RGBPALETTE(int n)` works like `COLOR()`, but it sets the n-th
colour in the ARGB palette.

- `colorRGB(int r, int g, int b)` can be used to compose a 32 bit
colour. This macro is typically used to set values in memory buffers
(see below).

- `IS_BGI_COLOR(int c)` and `IS_RGB_COLOR(int c)` return 1 if the
current colour is standard BGI or ARGB, respectively. The argument is
actually redundant; in fact, a colour entry in the range 0-15 may
belong to both palettes. Whether the standard palette or the ARGB
palette is the current one is set by standard BGI or ARGB functions.

- `ALPHA_VALUE(int c)`, `RED_VALUE(int c)`, `GREEN_VALUE(int c)`, and
`BLUE_VALUE(int c)` return the A, R, G, B component of an ARGB colour
in the extended palette.

- `getrgbpalette(struct rgbpalettetype* palette)` and
`setallrgbpalette (struct rgbpalettetype *palette)` work like their BGI
counterpart, but use the ARGB palette. The `colors` member of `struct
rgbpalettetype` variables must be initialised; please see
`demo/rgbpalette.c`.

- `setalpha(int col, Uint8 alpha)` sets the alpha component of colour
'col'.

- `setblendmode(int blendmode)` sets the blending mode for screen
refresh (`SDL_BLENDMODE_NONE` or `SDL_BLENDMODE_BLEND`).

- `char *colorname(int color)` return a string containing the color
name.


### Buffer Functions

- `getbuffer (Uint32 *buffer)` and `putbuffer (Uint32 *buffer)` copy
the current window contents to a memory buffer, and the reverse. Using
`getbuffer()` and `putbuffer()` is faster than direct pixel
manipulation, as shown by `demo/psychedelia.c`

- `getlinebuffer (int y, Uint32 *linebuffer)` and `putlinebuffer (int
y, Uint32 *linebuffer)` work like `getbuffer()` and `putbuffer()`, but
on a single line of pixels at `y` coordinate.


### Mouse Functions

- `int mouseclick(void)` returns the code of the mouse button that 
is being clicked, 0 otherwise. Mouse buttons and movement constants
are defined in `SDL_bgi.h`:

```
WM_LBUTTONDOWN
WM_MBUTTONDOWN
WM_RBUTTONDOWN
WM_WHEEL
WM_WHEELUP
WM_WHEELDOWN
WM_MOUSEMOVE
```

- `int isdoubleclick(void)` returns 1 if the last mouse click was a
double click.


- `int mousex(void)` and `int mousey(void)` return the mouse
coordinates of the last click.

- `int ismouseclick(int btn)` returns 1 if the `btn` mouse button was
clicked.

- `void getmouseclick(int kind, int *x, int *y)` sets the x, y
coordinates of the last button click expected by `ismouseclick()`.

- `void getleftclick(void)`, `void getmiddleclick(void)`, and `void
getrightclick(void)` wait for the left, middle, and right mouse button
to be clicked and released.

- `int getclick(void)` waits for a mouse click and returns the button
that was clicked.


### Miscellaneous Functions

- `showerrorbox(const char *message)` and `showinfobox(const char
*message)` open a window message box with the specified message.

- `void _putpixel(int x, int y)` is equivalent to `putpixel(int x, int
y, int col)`, but uses the current drawing colour and the pixel is not
refreshed in slow mode.

- `random(range)` is defined as macro: `rand()%range`

- `int getch()` waits for a key and returns its ASCII code. Special
keys and the `SDL_QUIT` event are also reported; please see
`SDL_bgi.h`.

- `void delay(msec)` waits for `msec` milliseconds.

- `int getevent(void)` waits for a keypress or mouse click, and
returns the code of the key or mouse button. It also catches and
returns `SDL_QUIT` events.

- `int event(void)` is a non-blocking version of `getevent()`.

- `int eventtype(void)` returns the type of the last event.

- `void readimagefile(char *filename, int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2)`
reads a `.bmp` file and displays it immediately (i.e. no refresh
needed).

- `void writeimagefile(char *filename, int left, int top, int right,
int bottom)` writes a `.bmp` file from the screen rectangle defined by
(left,top--right,bottom).

- `void kbhit(void)` returns 1 when a key is pressed, excluding
Shift, Alt, etc.

- `int lastkey(void)` returns the last key that was detected by
 `kbhit()`.

- `void xkbhit(void)` returns 1 when any key is pressed, including
Shift, Alt, etc.


## The Real Thing

You may want to try the online Borland Turbo C 2.01 emulator at the
Internet Archive:

<https://archive.org/details/msdos_borland_turbo_c_2.01>.

The `bgidemo.c` program demonstrates the capabilities of the BGI
library. You can download it and compile it using `SDL_bgi`; in
Windows, you will have to change its `main()` definition.


## Bugs & Issues

Please see the accompanying document `BUGS`.

Probably, this documentation is not 100% accurate. Your feedback is
more than welcome.
